October 1, 2024
Patrick Huang

Written for philosophy class.

I find trouble with D'Holbach's notion of a single free will that either exists
or does not; otherwise, I mostly agree with his argument.

D'Holbach argues about achieving free will by "breaking" physics (and how we
cannot do that). He claims that free will is acting according to one's own will;
and because our will is controlled wholly by physics, we don't have free will.

This is a sound argument, and being a functionalist, I agree. We are bound by
physics, and do not have free will in this sense.

However, I think it is worthwhile to analyze different definitions of free will,
as this determinism model is not very helpful beyond saying "we don't have free
will". Different interpretations of the premise of "nature controlling our will"
will yield different results.

Under determinism, I believe we still do have free will in a sense. Humans are
more chaotic than most other entities. Chaos means a small change in the initial
conditions will result in large changes in the outcome.


I use information theory and probability to state this: Given a state (e.g. me
sitting in a room), the probability distribution of what I could do next (e.g.
drink water, type more sentences, get food) is very spread out --- there is a
large amount of things I could do with relatively high probability. In
information theory, this is called aÂ high entropy distribution.

It is paradoxical to say that there is determinism and a probability
distribution; after all, only one outcome happens, so where does the
probability come from? My answer is that when we define a state, some parts of
it are not strictly specified, and instead are allowed to vary; e.g. the
velocity of every single air molecule. Those variables aren't important to the
consideration of the state. So, the probability distribution is obtained with an
average over all configurations of these unimportant things, and the resulting
outcome we measure. So, our behavior is high entropy because we are chaotic and
do "random" stuff when air molecules change.

Our high entropy behavior is a contrast to most things in nature. If you throw a
rock up, regardless of how the air molecules might change, the rock will fall
down. But small differences in air molecules might cause different neurons to
fire in your brain, drastically changing your behavior.

So, our "will" does overcome nature because nature can't control it; our free
will derives from being chaotic and unpredictable (while of course feeling
grounded in our decisions when we make them; but this is a psychological
argument).

Another aspect of free will is social free will. To what extent does your
position in society determine how you act?

Social mechanisms such as social reproduction compel people to behave in
mechanistic ways. For the most part, we are bound within our culture's norms,
and thus follow the mechanisms.

In this way, we don't have free will socially because nature (the society) does
control our movements.

Social free will is like climate, while chaotic free will is like weather.
While the weather can change chaotically like our small, transient actions, our
long term behavior is like a constant climate.

